===========
Physicality
===========

Locality
========

Summary
-------

Performance in respecting locality, by measuring deviations from a neglible interactions
between acetone and distance atoms.

Metrics
-------

1. Maximum difference in force due to "ghost atoms"

Forces on an isolated acetone molecule are calculated, and the forces on the same atoms
are calculated after 20 Ne atoms are placed in a 60 Å cubic box, at least 40 Å from the
acetone's centre of mass. The magnitude of the maximum difference in force is reported.

2. Mean difference in force due to a distance hydrogen

Forces on an isolated acetone molecule are calculated, and the forces on the same atoms
are calculated after a single hydrogen atom is placed between 20 and 50 Å from the
acetone's centre of mass. This is repeated for 30 different random placements of the
hydrogen atom, the mean force difference on the acetone atoms is calculared.

3. Standard deviation in force due to a distance hydrogen

Same as (2), but the standard deviation of the force difference on the acetone atoms is
calculated.


Computational cost
------------------

Low: tests are likely to take less than a minutes to run on CPU.


Data availability
-----------------

None required.


Extensivity
===========

Summary
-------

Performance in respecting extensivity, by measuring differences in energy between
isolated systems, and the same systems combined, but significantly separated.

Metrics
-------

1. Absolute energy difference between isolated and combined slabs

The energy of two isolated slabs is calculated, and the energy of the combined system,
with the two slabs separated by 100 Å is calculated. The absolute energy difference
between the sum of the isolated slabs and that of the combined system is calculated.


Computational cost
------------------

Low: tests are likely to take less than a minutes to run on CPU.


Data availability
-----------------

None required.


Diatomics
=========

Summary
-------

This benchmark probes the short- to medium-range behaviour of every homonuclear and
heteronuclear diatomic pair in the periodic table. Each MLIP is evaluated on a 100-point
linear distance grid spanning 0.18-6.0 Å and the resulting energies and projected forces
are analysed for unphysical oscillations.

Metrics
-------

1. Force flips

   Average number of times the projected bond force changes sign. Forces are projected
   onto the bond axis and values below :math:`10^{-2}` eV/Å are rounded to zero to avoid
   counting noise-induced flips. A smooth curve should switch from attraction to repulsion
   only once at the minimum.


2. Energy minima

   Mean count of distinct minima in the energy-distance profile. Local minima are
   found from the second derivative, where a physical diatomic should show a single
   minimum.


3. Energy inflections

   Mean number of inflection points obtained from the second derivative of the energy
   curve. Inflections are flagged when the second derivative changes sign with a
   tolerance of 0.5 eV/Å² to avoid counting noise-induced inflections. A physical diatomic
   curve should show one inflection point.

4. :math:`\rho(E, \text{repulsion})`

   Spearman correlation between atomic separation and energy on the repulsive side of the well
   (bond lengths ≥ the equilibrium spacing). A perfect diatomic curve should show a strong
   negative correlation, so a value of -1, indicating that as atoms get further apart, the energy
   decreases.

5. :math:`\rho(E, \text{attraction})`

   Spearman correlation between distance and energy on the attractive side (bond lengths
   shorter than the equilibrium spacing). A perfect diatomic curve should show a strong
   positive correlation, so a value of +1, indicating that as atoms get closer together, the
   energy increases.

Computational cost
------------------

High: Expected to take hours to run on GPU, or around one day for slower MLIPs.

Data availability
-----------------

None required; diatomics are generated in ASE.


Compression
=========

Summary
-------
This benchmark is a many-body analogue to the diatomics benchmark.
Single element crystal structures are generated using common prototypes, namely (sc, bcc, fcc, hcp and diamond).
Further structures are randomly generated, subject to minimum distance constraints, using pxtal.
The final structures are then isotropically scaled such that min(d_ij/(r_i + r_j)) = 1.0,
where d_ij is the distance between atoms i and j, and r_i and r_j are the covalent radii of the respective atoms.
A linear grid of scale factors containing 100 points is generated from 0.25 to 3.0.
The structures are then scaled (scale factor applied to all cell vectors) and the energy and pressure are calculated.
The resulting energies and projected forces are analysed for unphysical oscillations and "holes".
All structures were generated by running ml_peg/calcs/physicality/compression/calc_compression.py directly.

Metrics
-------

1. Pressure sign flips and Big Pressure sign flips

   Analogous to force flips in the diatomics benchmark, this metric counts the number of times the isotropic pressure changes sign.
   Pressure sign flips uses a tolerance of 0.001 GPa whilst Big Pressure sign flips uses a tolerance of 1 GPa, to avoid counting noise-induced flips.
   Whilst it is plausible that some, very contrived, configurations should show multiple sign flips in the pressure curve almost all materials should show 1.


2. Energy minima and Deep Energy minima

   Mean count of distinct minima in the energy-scale factor profile. Local minima are
   found from the second derivative using tolerance of 1meV/atom and 100 meV/atom for Energy minima and Deep Energy minima respectively.


3. Holes

   A "hole" is defined as a point on the energy-scale factor curve where the energy is less than the energy at the equilibrium scale factor by more than 100 eV/atom.
   This is a crude and "cautious" definition, with the idea of flagging catestrophic model failures only.

4. :math:`\rho(-E, V_{\text{small}})`

   Spearman correlation between scale factor and minus energy for :math:`scale < scale(E_{\min})` (i.e. the compressed side of the curve).
   A perfect curve should show a strong positive correlation, so a value of +1, indicating that as the structure is compressed, the energy increases.
   As above, this assumes a single minimum in the energy-scale factor curve, which is the case for almost all materials.
   This metric will be polluted in models containing holes.

5. :math:`\rho(E, V_{\text{large}})`

   Spearman correlation between scale factor and energy for :math:`scale > scale(E_{\min})` (i.e. the expanded side of the curve).
   A perfect curve should show a strong positive correlation, so a value of +1, indicating that as the structure is expanded, the energy increases.
   As above, this assumes a single minimum in the energy-scale factor curve, which is the case for almost all materials.
   This metric will be polluted in models containing holes.

Computational cost
------------------

High: Expected to take hours to run on GPU, or around one day for slower MLIPs.

Data availability
-----------------

None required; prototype structures are generated in ASE and random structures are generated using pxtal.
